---
title: "Software Sustainability Institute Fellowship"
author: uieda
date: 2020-01-01
period: 2020-2021
agency: Software Sustainability Institute
funds: GBP 3000
institution: University of Liverpool
layout: publication
thumbnail: ssi2020.png
tags: ssi-fellowship
---

{% from "utils.html" import make_tag, youtube_embed %}

# About

The [Software Sustainability Institute](https://www.software.ac.uk/) offers
yearly fellowships to fund the organization of communities around scientific
software (creating of local user groups, workshops, hackathons, etc).
I was [selected to be part of the 2020 cohort of fellows][/blog/ssi-fellowship].

All outputs (blogs, posters, papers, talks, etc) related to the fellowship will
be collected under the {{ make_tag("ssi-fellowship") }} tag.

# Application

This is the screencast I made for my application:

{{ youtube_embed("fT4QRbdv274") }}

And the following is a transcript of the video:


> Hello! My name is Leonardo Uieda. I'm a Lecturer of Geophysics at the
> University of Liverpool. This is my application for the Software Sustainability
> Institute's 2020 Fellowship program.
>
> First a bit about me. I'm originally from Brazil where I got my Bachelors,
> Masters, and PhD in Geophysics. My first contact with programming was as an
> undergraduate student and I have been hacking on one project or another ever
> since. My Bachelors dissertation project was the development of an
> open-source software tool called Tesseroids for modeling gravity data in a
> global context. This software went on to be used to process and analyze data
> from the European Space Agency's GOCE satellite mission. During my Masters
> and PhD, I started the Fatiando a Terra project (which is portuguese for
> Slicing the Earth). It is a collection of Python tools for geophysical
> modelling. The initial motivation was to build the tools that I needed for my
> research and to allow others to reuse my work. Nine years later, Fatiando is
> now the foundation for most research done by my former lab. At the lab, I
> also started a culture of publishing the code associated with our papers on
> Github and figshare, which the lab has continued to do ever since. As a
> professor at the State University of Rio de Janeiro, I used open-source
> software tools, like Fatiando and Jupyter notebooks, to teach geophysics and
> computational thinking. I went on to a visiting researcher position at the
> University of Hawaii to work on the Generic Mapping Tools software (or GMT
> for short). GMT has been around for 30 years and is now a crucial piece of
> infrastructure in many areas of the geosciences. My original job was to
> develop a Python interface for GMT. In the end, I also overhauled the
> development process by bringing GMT from a self-hosted subversion to Github,
> configuring continuous integration, adopting a code of conduct, and pushing
> for more emphasis on usability and documentation.
>
> So what have I been up to lately? In August 2019, I joined the University of
> Liverpool in the UK as Lecturer of Geophysics, where I'm establishing the
> Computer-Oriented Geoscience lab. My main goal for the lab is invest in
> open-source software and train our members to participate in open-source
> communities. I'm a topic editor for the Journal of Open Source Software
> (JOSS) and I've recently registered as a Software Carpentry instructor. In
> the past couple of years, I have gotten together with a group of like-minded
> geoscientists to organize an open-source software initiative at the American
> Geophysical Union. We seek to elevate the role of software within our
> community by organizing discussions, tutorials, and sessions around
> open-source software.
>
> If I'm awarded the fellowship, I plan to work towards three main goals:
>
> First, I want to bring together a local group at the University of Liverpool
> to share knowledge, tools, approaches to science, and organize workshops,
> like Software Carpentry. There are some isolated groups developing research
> software around the University and my goal would be to bring them together.
> This would include giving talks in other departments about software
> development best practices, reproducible research, and how to get credit for
> software work through JOSS.
>
> Second, I will connect with other UK and European geoscientists who develop
> open-source software to discuss the creation of an open-source initiative at
> the European Geosciences Union. Their annual meeting gathers 10s of thousands
> of geoscientists from the UK, Europe, and the rest of the world. The same
> issues we have been addressing within the American Geophysical Union, like
> recognition for software work and publishing software tools, also need to be
> discussed within the EGU. An exciting possibility would be to establish a
> partnership between JOSS and EGU journals to promote the publication of
> high-quality software.
>
> Third, I will work to fill in the knowledge gap between the basics of coding
> (which are well covered by Software Carpentry) and the day-to-day practices
> of most modern open-source software projects. Things like setting up
> continuous integration, reviewing pull requests, structuring documentation,
> and packaging are very challenging to learn but not usually taught. Often,
> scientists are not even aware that these things exist. At the 2018 American
> Geophysical Union meeting, we ran a workshop covering these topics. It was
> sold out and the feedback we received from participants indicates that there
> is a lot of interest in learning these skills. With the fellowship I will
> work on generating a Software Carpentry-style lesson out of our workshop
> material. To test and iterate on the content, I'll run one or two workshops
> at the University of Liverpool or another UK institution.
>
> To reiterate, my plan is to establish a local community in Liverpool, discuss
> the creation of an open-source initiative at EGU, and create educational
> materials to fill the gap between novice and expert coders.
>
> More than any amount of money, the most important thing I have to gain from
> the fellowship is the connection with past and current fellows and the
> institute as a whole. What I have come to realize is that coding is just the
> tip of the iceberg. The most challenging part is nurturing and maintaining a
> healthy community of practice. The SSI fellows are an amazing cohort of
> experienced communicators, open-science advocates, and passionate members of
> the UK software community. I have much to learn from everyone and would love
> to work together to make UK science the best it can be.
