title: 3D gravity gradient inversion by planting density anomalies
author: Uieda, L., and V. C. F. Barbosa
date: 23-05-2011
type: poster
slug: eage2011
pdf: eage-2011.pdf
poster: 10.6084/m9.figshare.91511
event: 73th EAGE Conference and Exhibition incorporating SPE EUROPEC
repository: leouieda/eage2011
citation: Uieda, L., and V. C. F. Barbosa (2011), 3D gravity gradient inversion by planting density anomalies, 73th EAGE Conference & Exhibition incorporating SPE EUROPEC, pp. 1-5
thumbnail: images/poster-eage2011.png


## Abstract

We present a new gravity gradient tensor inversion for estimating a 3D
density-contrast distribution defined on a user-specified grid of prisms. Our
method consists of an iterative algorithm that does not require the solution of
large equation system. Instead, the solution grows systematically around
user-specified prismatic elements called “seeds”. Each seed can have a
different density contrast, allowing the interpretation of multiples bodies
with different density contrasts. The compactness of the solution is imposed by
means of a regularizing function that favors compact bodies closest to the
priorly specified seeds. The solution grows by accreting neighboring prisms of
the current solution. The prisms for the accretion are chosen by systematically
searching the set of current neighboring prisms. Therefore, this approach
allows that the columns of the Jacobian matrix be calculated on demand. This is
a known technique from computer science called “lazy evaluation”, which greatly
reduces the demand of computer memory and processing time. Test on synthetic
data from multiple buried sources at different depths and on real data
collected over iron deposits located in the Quadrilátero Ferrífero,
southeastern region of Brazil, confirmed the ability of our method in detecting
sharp and compact bodies.
