---
title: Computation of the gravity gradient tensor due to topographic masses using tesseroids
author: uieda, ussami, carla
date: 2010-08-09
event: AGU Meeting of the Americas
repository: leouieda/agu2010
slides: 10.6084/m9.figshare.156858
doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.156858
presentation: oral
thumbnail: agu2010.png
alm: true
layout: publication
---

# Presentation

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed"
data-id="18e3bb4854244246909560431f2d9e24" data-ratio="1.33333333333333"
src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>

# About

This is a presentation of the methods behind the open-source software
[/software/tesseroids]. The algorithms implemented in the software have
since been updated (see the paper [/papers/paper-tesseroids-2016]).
The content of this presentation is a summary of my
[Bachelor's degree thesis](http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.963547).

Other presentations about *Tesseroids*:

* [/talks/goce2011]

# Abstract

**AGU abstract ID**: Abstract G22A–04

The GOCE satellite mission has the objective of measuring the Earth's
gravitational field with an unprecedented accuracy through the measurement of
the gravity gradient tensor (GGT). One of the several applications of this new
gravity data set is to study the geodynamics of the lithospheric plates, where
the flat Earth approximation may not be ideal and the Earth's curvature should
be taken into account. In such a case, the Earth could be modeled using
tesseroids, also called spherical prisms, instead of the conventional
rectangular prisms. The GGT due to a tesseroid is calculated using numerical
integration methods, such as the Gauss-Legendre Quadrature (GLQ), as already
proposed by Asgharzadeh et al. (2007) and Wild-Pfeiffer (2008). We present a
computer program for the direct computation of the GGT caused by a tesseroid
using the GLQ. The accuracy of this implementation was evaluated by comparing
its results with the result of analytical formulas for the special case of a
spherical cap with computation point located at one of the poles. The GGT due
to the topographic masses of the Parana basin (SE Brazil) was estimated at
260km altitude in an attempt to quantify this effect on the GOCE gravity data.
The digital elevation model ETOPO1 (Amante and Eakins, 2009) between 40º W and
65º W and 10º S and 35º S, which includes the Paraná Basin, was used to
generate a tesseroid model of the topography with grid spacing of 10' x 10' and
a constant density of 2670 kg/m3. The largest amplitude observed was on the
second vertical derivative component (-0.05 to 1.20 Eötvos) in regions of rough
topography, such as that along the eastern Brazilian continental margins. These
results indicate that the GGT due to topographic masses may have amplitudes of
the same order of magnitude as the GGT due to density anomalies within the
crust and mantle.

**References**

Amante, C., Eakins, B.W., 2009. ETOPO1 1 Arc-Minute Global Relief Model:
Procedures, Data Sources and Analysis. NOAA Technical Memorandum NESDIS
NGDC-24, p. 19.

Asgharzadeh, M.F.; Von Frese, R.R.B.; Kim, H.R.; Leftwich, T.E.; Kim, J.W.,
2007. Spherical prism gravity effects by Gauss-Legendre quadrature integration.
Geophysics Journal International, v. 169, p. 1 - 11.

Wild-Pfeiffer, F., 2008. A comparison of different mass elements for use in
gravity gradiometry. Journal of Geodesy, v. 82 (10), p. 637 - 653.
