---
title: "Joint Interpolation of 3-component GPS Velocities Constrained by Elasticity"
author: uieda, sandwell, pwessel
date: 2018-06-05
event: AOGS 15th Annual Meeting
repository: leouieda/aogs2018-gps
license: Creative Commons Attribution
thumbnail: aogs2018-gps.png
slides: 10.6084/m9.figshare.6387467
alm: true
layout: publication
tags: equivalent-layer, gps, earthscope2018
---


# About

This talk is about some early results from a collaboration me and Paul have
with [David Sandwell](http://topex.ucsd.edu/sandwell/). The project was started
by Paul and Dave as a follow up to their [2016 paper about interpolating 2D
vector data](https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL070340).
We're expanding it into 3D and ironing out some kinks in the methodology.
I picked it up at the beginning of the year and have been slowly trying things
out.
It was a great chance to play with some tools from machine learning since this
is a supervised prediction problem.
Unlike most geophysical inversion, we're not really interested in the estimated
parameters themselves.
They are only a means to predict new values (on a regular grid in the case of
gridding).
I started implementing the tools I would need in a Python library called
[Verde](https://github.com/fatiando/verde), which served as the basis for the
results shown in the presentation.

I made the slides using Google Docs with the Barlow font for the most part and
EB Garamond for some of the math symbols. I used an [online Latex equation
editor](http://www.codecogs.com/latex/eqneditor.php) to generate the equations
as high resolution PNGs. Not ideal but it's a price I will pay for avoiding
LibreOffice Impress.

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9">
<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vT2blQXTNT6lrJnOOq2GjOdTwQKG4POzYRff8IkrIlb6EZdpFWLobEUe91FYWjBrvSWFv1bfkrO2yBM/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=60000" frameborder="0" width="960" height="749" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>
</div>



# Abstract


Vertical ground motion at fault systems can be difficult to detect due to their
small amplitude and contamination from non-tectonic sources, such as ground
water loading. However, it may play an important role in our understanding of
the earthquake cycle and the associated seismic hazards. Ground motion
measurements from GPS are often sparse and must be interpolated onto a regular
grid (e.g., for computing strain rate), ideally taking into account the varying
degrees of uncertainty of the data. Traditionally, each vector component is
interpolated separately using minimum curvature or biharmonic spline methods.
Recently, a joint interpolation of the two horizontal components has been
developed using the Green's functions for a point force deforming a thin
elastic sheet. The elasticity constraints provide a coupling between the two
vector components and lead to improved results because the underlying physics
of the method approximately matches that of the GPS observations. We propose an
expansion of this method into 3D in order to incorporate vertical GPS velocity
measurements. To smooth the model and avoid singularities, we formulate the
interpolation as a weighted least-squares inverse problem with damping
regularization. Optimal values of the regularization parameter and the
Poisson's ratio of the elastic medium are determined through K-fold
cross-validation, a technique often used in machine learning for model
selection. Additionally, the cross-validation provides a measure of the
accuracy of model predictions and eliminates the need for manual configuration.
The computational load of the inversion is lessened by imposing a cutoff
distance to the Green's functions computations, which makes the sensitivity
matrix sparse. We will present preliminary results from an application to
EarthScope GPS data from the San Andreas Fault system. In the future, we aim to
develop a joint inversion of 3D GPS and InSAR line-of-sight velocities to
improve data coverage.
