---
title: "Evaluating the accuracy of equivalent-source predictions using cross-validation"
author: uieda, santiago
date: 2020-05-05
event: EGU 2020
license: Creative Commons Attribution
thumbnail: egu2020.png
slides: 10.6084/m9.figshare.12245372
doi: 10.5194/egusphere-egu2020-15729
alm: true
layout: publication
tags: equivalent-layer, fatiando, machine-learning
---

# About

Presented at EGU 2020 (online because of COVID-19), session
"[G4.3: Acquisition and processing of gravity and magnetic field data and their integrative interpretation](https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU2020/session/35332)".
Details some of the work we've been doing in [Verde][/papers/verde] and
[Harmonica](https://github.com/fatiando/harmonica) for machine-learning style
interpolation with equivalent-sources.
In particular, applying state-of-the-art cross-validation strategies to
estimate interpolation accuracy and tune equivalent-source parameters.

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9">
<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vQQRbUG9XTvZxH-rwviVSMuiJPC7DqpFe3dJKw5ZsxI3mHr9L1Zh94OQBUKnnJBZ3Rej-jj8CsHI16l/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=60000" frameborder="0" width="960" height="569" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>
</div>

## Short pitch

> For the meeting, we had to introduce our presentation with a short pitch in
> the online chat.

We are looking into cross-validation (CV) to automatically determine the main
parameters in equivalent source/layer processing: depth, damping, source
layouts. But before we can do that, we need to understand how well CV estimates
the error of equivalent source model predictions. We know from the ecological
modeling literature that data that are spatially auto-correlated (close
variables tend to be similar) tend to underestimate error in cross-validation.

Our main question for this presentation was: Does this also happen for
potential field modeling with equivalent sources?

In short, yes it does.

We found that regular CV methods underestimate the prediction mean square
error. But "block" versions of CV (again, borrowed from ecology) are capable of
mitigating this bias.

Main message: take care when using cross-validation in potential field
modeling. Prefer "block" versions of methods when possible.

Both the cross-validation and equivalent source models are open-source and
implemented in Python libraries.
The block cross-validation is being implemented into the next release of
[Verde][/papers/verde] and equivalent source processing is already
available in [Harmonica](https://github.com/fatiando/harmonica).


## Abstract

We investigate the use of cross-validation (CV) techniques to estimate the
accuracy of equivalent-source (also known as equivalent-layer) models for
interpolation and processing of potential-field data.
Our preliminary results indicate that some common CV algorithms (e.g., random
permutations and k-folds) tend to overestimate the accuracy.
We have found that blocked CV methods, where the data are split along spatial
blocks instead of randomly, provide more conservative and realistic accuracy
estimates.
Beyond evaluating an equivalent-source model's performance, cross-validation
can be used to automatically determine configuration parameters, like source
depth and amount of regularization, that maximize prediction accuracy and avoid
over-fitting.

Widely used in gravity and magnetic data processing,
the equivalent-source technique consists of a linear model (usually point
sources) used to predict the observed field at arbitrary locations.
Upward-continuation, interpolation, gradient calculations, leveling, and
reduction-to-the-pole can be performed simultaneously by using the model
to make predictions (i.e., forward modelling).
Likewise, the use of linear models to make predictions is the backbone of many
machine learning (ML) applications.
The predictive performance of ML models is usually evaluated through
cross-validation, in which the data are split (usually randomly) into a
training set and a validation set.
Models are fit on the training set and their predictions are evaluated using
the validation set using a goodness-of-fit metric, like the mean square error
or the R² coefficient of determination.
Many cross-validation methods exist in the literature, varying in how the data
are split and how this process is repeated.
Prior research from the statistical modelling of ecological data suggests that
prediction accuracy is usually overestimated by traditional CV methods when the
data are spatially auto-correlated.
This issue can be mitigated by splitting the data along spatial blocks
rather than randomly.
We conducted experiments on synthetic gravity data to investigate the use of
traditional and blocked CV methods in equivalent-source interpolation.
We found that the overestimation problem also occurs and that more conservative
accuracy estimates are obtained when applying blocked versions of random
permutations and k-fold.
Further studies need to be conducted to generalize these findings to
upward-continuation, reduction-to-the-pole, and derivative calculation.

Open-source software implementations of the equivalent-source and blocked
cross-validation (in progress) methods are available in the Python libraries
Harmonica and Verde, which are part of the Fatiando a Terra project
([www.fatiando.org](https://www.fatiando.org/)).
