---
title: Rapid 3D inversion of gravity and gravity gradient data to test geologic hypotheses
author: uieda, barbosa
date: 2012-10-15
repository: leouieda/gghs2012
presentation: oral
slides: 10.6084/m9.figshare.156859
doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.156859
event: International Symposium on Gravity, Geoid and Height Systems
thumbnail: gghs2012.png
alm: true
layout: publication
---

# Presentation

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed"
data-id="e13e025b29be431aabdd9cdb3c91c840" data-ratio="1.33159947984395"
src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>

# Abstract

Forward modeling of potential fields is a useful way to incorporate the
interpreter's knowledge about the geology of the interpretation area into the
model. However, this can be a very tedious task. This is specially true when
modeling in 3D and trying to fit multiple components, e.g., in gravity
gradiometry. The interpreter is required to simultaneously supervise the data
fit and the construction of geologically realistic 3D bodies. This problem is
partially solved by methods of geophysical inversion, which automatically fit
the data. Conversely, inverse problems introduce other challenges of their own.
Most geophysical inverse problems are ill-posed because their solutions are
neither unique nor stable. Thus, they require the introduction of prior
information, usually through regularizing functions. Moreover, 3D inverse
problems are very computationally expensive. Recent developments in potential
field inversion have proposed different regularizing functions to transform the
ill-posed problem into a well-posed one. Also, several techniques, like data
compression and parallel computation, have been applied to overcome the
computational complexity. We call attention to the method of potential field
inversion by planting anomalous densities. This method uses an iterative
algorithm to automatically grow the anomalous bodies around user-specified
prismatic elements called "seeds", which have fixed density contrasts and
positions. These seeds provide a first estimate of the skeletal outlines of the
presumed anomalous bodies. Then, the inversion iteratively concentrates mass
around this "skeleton" in a way that both fits the observed data and yields
compact bodies. Therefore, the interpreter can easily impose prior information
on the inversion through the seeds. The interpreter needs only to supply a few
seeds that specify the sources' skeleton, eliminating the exhaustive task of
specifying the complete geometry of multiple sources. Moreover, the interpreter
is liberated from the time- consuming procedure of yielding a reasonable fit to
the data. Due to its high computational efficiency, the method of planting
anomalous densities can be used to quickly test geologic hypothesis of
different locations and density contrasts for presumed sources. To test a
hypothesis, one would choose the locations and density contrasts of the seeds
accordingly and verify if the inversion result is able to fit the observed
data. If it is not able, then the hypothesis can be rejected and a new one can
be formulated and tested. Otherwise, there is no reason to reject the
hypothesis on the basis of the geophysical data. Thus, the method can be viewed
as a an enhanced forward modeling. The method of planting anomalous densities
can be used with both gravity and gravity gradient data. This makes it an ideal
tool to interpret compact geologic bodies using the new generation GOCE data.
We present applications to synthetic and real data that illustrate the
usefulness of our method.
