---
title: Use of the "shape-of-anomaly" data misfit in 3D inversion by planting anomalous densities
author: uieda, barbosa
date: 2012-11-01
pdf: seg-2012.pdf
repository: leouieda/seg2012
presentation: oral
slides: 10.6084/m9.figshare.156864
event: SEG Annual Meeting
doi: 10.1190/segam2012-0383.1
thumbnail: seg2012.png
citation: Uieda, L., and V. C. F. Barbosa (2012), Use of the "shape-of-anomaly" data misfit in 3D inversion by planting anomalous densities, SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts, pp. 1-6, doi:10.1190/segam2012-0383.1
alm: true
layout: publication
---

# Presentation

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed"
data-id="53506cda61aa4cd4b15fa620cb7198ec" data-ratio="1.77777777777778"
src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>

# About

This talk and expanded abstract present an improvement over the method I
developed for my Masters degree dissertation
"[/papers/paper-planting-anomalous-densities-2012]".
The inversion method was developed along a few iterations and presented at
different meetings
(in order):

* 2011: [/talks/eage2011]
* 2011: [/talks/seg2011]
* 2011: [/talks/sbgf2011]
* 2012: [/papers/paper-planting-anomalous-densities-2012] (the paper)
* 2012: This talk
* 2013: [/talks/agu-cancun2013]

I have added an **open-source** implementation of the method to the Python
library [Fatiando a Terra](http://www.fatiando.org). In version `0.1` to `0.4`,
the code is in module `fatiando.gravmag.harvester`.

# Abstract

We present an improvement to the method of 3D gravity gradient inversion by
planting anomalous densities. This method estimates a density-contrast
distribution defined on a grid of right-rectangular prisms. Instead of solving
large equation systems, the method uses a systematic search algorithm to grow
the solution, one prism at a time, around user-specified prisms called "seeds".
These seeds have known density contrasts and the solution is constrained to be
concentrated around the seeds as well as have their density contrasts. Thus,
prior geologic and geophysical information are incorporated into the inverse
problem through the seeds. However, this leads to a strong dependence of the
solution on the correct location, density contrast, and number of seeds used.
Our improvement to this method consists of using the "shape-of-anomaly"
data-misfit function in conjunction with the l2-norm data-misfit function. The
shape-of-anomaly function measures the different in shape between the observed
and predicted data and is insensitive to differences in amplitude. Tests on
synthetic and real data show that the improved method not only has an increased
robustness with respect to the number of seeds and their locations, but also
provides a better fit of the observed data.
